(♪♪)
>> Erica: Time to meet up with
the winner of Canada's dumbest
charge!
>> Erica: Five Canadians took
on big companies.
And five frustrating fees.
>> Heyho, heyho, this paper
charge has got to go.
>> Erica: In a nationwide
competition to find Canada's
dumbest charge, they went head
to head for your vote!
>> You people are bandits.
>> Erica: Now the results are
in.
Who did you pick?
What is Canada's dumbest
charge?
(dog barking)
>> Erica: You're about to
find out.
(♪♪)
>> Tom: But first up,
we're in a grocery store,
shopping for gluten free
goods.
>> Tom: To gluten, or not to
gluten.
That's our question.
Trying to get at the truth
behind the trend.
>> Tom: Excuse me.
Should I buy gluten free pasta
or regular pasta.
>> Gluten free.
>> Tom: Really?
>> I think it's better for you.
>> Tom: Hmm.
Let's see what another shopper
thinks.
Hey there, excuse me.
Do you think I should buy
regular pasta or the gluten
free?
>> You should probably try the
gluten free one.
I believe it's healthier.
>> Tom: Yup, once a specialty
found in health food stores,
gluten free products are now
mainstream.
>> Tom: Betty Crocker?
What's cookin' Betty?
They're everywhere!
Pancake mix, gluten free.
Pancakes from scratch every
Sunday.
Avoiding gluten is the food
obsession du jour.
In fact, one in five of us
steer clear.
>> Tom: Hmm.
Gluten zero, Tom one.
>> You read all these magazine
articles, or newspaper articles
that say if you feel this way,
maybe try gluten free products.
You won't -- you'll feel better,
you won't feel so bloated.
Maybe even lose some pounds, you
know?
>> Tom: So is that what all this
is all about?
A healthier diet?
I push on for answers.
These look good.
Glutino.
Excuse me.
Should I buy these cookies?
>> Well, it depends.
Are you celiac?
>> Tom: No.
>> Then move along Mister.
This is my food.
>> Tom: Actually, we know who
this guy is.
He's B.C. comedian Darcy
Michael.
And the gluten-free trend has
got him shaking his head.
Why?
For Darcy, it's not a lifestyle
choice -- it's a necessity.
>> People aren't treating it
like the disease that it is.
They're treating it like Atkins
diet.
It's too trendy.
Stop it!
You're ruining my life.
>> Tom: Darcy's one of only
about 35,000 Canadian diagnosed
with celiac disease.
Gluten attacks him.
>> Tom: Living with it, what's
the physical effect if you have
some --
>> It's terrible, like if I --
the first year into being
gluten-free I said to my
husband, I was like, I'm gonna
to go and have a burger.
I want to go and get a fast
food burger.
I haven't had one in a year.
And the next morning it was like
a dinosaur coming out of the
bedroom.
I was like roooaaarrr.
And my waist was 8 inches
bigger.
And as a gay man that is the
worst punishment in the world,
you know?
You do not want to have an 8
inch belly -- or well, most gay
men are like 8 inches, so
fat.
(laughter)
>> But no, besides like, just
the pure bloating, you're just
emotionally you're a wreck and
physically you're like, I can't
eat for days afterwards.
>> Tom: And how long do those
symptoms last?
>> I call it being glutened --
if I get glutened, I could be
off work for 2 weeks from it --
just being sick.
>> Tom: So what is the truth?
Should we all fear being
glutened, especially with all
the caution wrapped around it.
Caution that's got many of us
tied in knots.
And it's no wonder.
Check out all these headlines.
Shrink your waistline, with a
decadent gluten free ingredient.
Gwyneth Paltrow shares how
going gluten-free changed her
family's life.
And get this, more than four
million Canadians are going
gluten free.
Wow!
(♪♪)
>> Tom: When it comes to the
gluten free trade, companies go
where the celebrities are.
>> I don't discriminate when
it comes to food so I like to
try everything.
I tried Udi's today and I like
it.
>> Tom: Check out this video
brought to you by Udi's.
A huge North American brand.
Trotting out a galaxy of stars.
>> We've seen a lot of changes
in our health.
We feel a lot better.
Going ga-ga over Udi's gluten
free products.
>> What I experience is that
it tastes potentially even
better.
(laughter)
>> Tom: But, unless celebrities
have celiac disease, Darcy
Michael says the stars should
keep their mouths shut.
>> Tom: What do you make of
the celebrities who are going
gluten-free and saying it's
changed their lives?
>> Oh yeah, like Miley Cyrus
says it's how she lost all the
weight, saying gluten is crap.
Which is ironic because that's
how I found out I was allergic
to gluten.
(laughter)
>> Tom: So what is gluten?
A protein that gives bread its
spring.
Found in wheat, barley and rye.
But do we actually know that?
Canadian movie stars Seth Rogen
and Jay Baruchel lampoon the
anti-gluten trend in their hit
film "This is the End."
You don't even know what
gluten is!
>> I (bleep) know what gluten
is.
>> You have no idea.
>> I do know what gluten is.
Gluten's a vague term.
It's something that's used to
categorize things that are bad.
You know, calories, that's a
gluten.
Fat, that's a gluten.
>> Somebody just told you, you
probably shouldn't eat gluten.
You're like, oh, I guess
I shouldn't eat gluten.
Gluten means bad (bleep), and
I'm not eating it.
>> Mmm, this bite is better
than the previous bite.
>> Tom: Funny stuff.
Compared to those guys, our
shoppers know more right?
Time for Darcy and I to find
out.
>> I'm just the eye candy for
this interview.
>> Oh, I thought I was the eye
candy.
>> Tom: I thought I was the eye
Okay jeez.
candy.
Do you know what gluten is?
Okay jeez.
>> Uh, one of the items in --
Do you know what gluten is?
in wheat products.
>> Uh, one of the items in --
Starch?
in wheat products.
>> Tom: Starch?
Starch?
Not quite!
>> Tom: Starch?
>> I tend to think sometimes
Not quite!
maybe it's a new trend.
>> I tend to think sometimes
>> Would it be -- ooh, like a
maybe it's a new trend.
starch.
>> Would it be -- ooh, like a
A wheat.
starch.
>> (mumbling) Protein.
A wheat.
>> Protein.
>> (mumbling) Protein.
>> Tom: Bingo!
>> Protein.
(laughter)
>> Tom: Bingo!
>> You got it!
(laughter)
>> Tom: It's a game show!
>> You got it!
Seems to be a lot of guesswork
>> Tom: It's a game show!
when it comes to gluten.
Seems to be a lot of guesswork
Timothy Caulfield leads the
when it comes to gluten.
health law institute at the
Timothy Caulfield leads the
University of Alberta.
health law institute at the
He's studied the food
University of Alberta.
industry's influence on
He's studied the food
consumers for years.
industry's influence on
>> Tom: Where's the marketing
consumers for years.
philosophy or strategy coming
>> Tom: Where's the marketing
from?
philosophy or strategy coming
>> History tells us that people
from?
are often looking for a simple
>> History tells us that people
answer.
are often looking for a simple
They want a particular
answer.
component, right?
They want a particular
Whether it's sugar, whether
component, right?
it's fat, whether it's salt,
Whether it's sugar, whether
something that's going to fix
it's fat, whether it's salt,
their health issues.
something that's going to fix
And I think marketers can play
their health issues.
on that, right?
And I think marketers can play
They can play on -- it's almost
on that, right?
like simplifying the story
They can play on -- it's almost
around nutrition to this
like simplifying the story
component of going
around nutrition to this
gluten-free.
component of going
>> Tom: That story seems to be
gluten-free.
working.
>> Tom: That story seems to be
Remember, in Canada, only about
working.
35,000 people have been
Remember, in Canada, only about
diagnosed with celiac disease.
35,000 people have been
Yet millions of us are trying
diagnosed with celiac disease.
to avoid it.
Yet millions of us are trying
To the tune of half a billion
to avoid it.
dollars in sales.
So how does that break down at
the cash register?
(♪♪)
(cheering and applause)
>> Tom: Welcome to this week's
edition of "The Price is What?"
Let's meet our contestants?
Cassidy and Chris.
Come on down!
(applause)
(♪♪)
>> Tom: They're both shopping
for meals but who will get the
better deals?
She's gluten free.
And he's fancy free!
Let's get things started with
Betty Crocker devil's food
cake mix.
Cost?
$2.49.
How about Betty's gluten-free
cake mix?
$6.99!
(buzz)
>> Tom: Almost three times the
price!
(♪♪)
(audience laughter)
>> Tom: Next up.
Noodling with spaghetti.
This brand costs $1.79.
What does Cassidy's gluten
free version check in at?
$2.99.
(buzz)
>> Tom: Over a dollar more,
and you get way less.
We've got some Dempsters
buns.
The gluten-free version costs
almost 50% more.
(buzz)
>> Tom: Looks like gluten free
is getting clobbered.
(cheering and applause)
>> Tom: But, there's still the
bonus round.
How 'bout some bread?
This whole wheat loaf costs
$2.99.
Udi's whole grain clocks in at
$6.29!
Jeepers Cass!
>> Tom: Gluten free is still
more expensive but for that?
It's got to be more nutritious.
Or is it?
Stay tuned!
(cheering and applause)
>> Erica: Later, we reveal the
winner of Canada's dumbest
charge.
And our competition makes waves
in Ottawa.
>> When will the government
stop the nickel and diming of
Canadians?
(applause)
>> Tom: What's your gut
reaction.
Think gluten-free is better for
you?
Share you thoughts on Facebook
and Twitter.
(♪♪)
>> Tom: We're shopping for the
truth behind the trend when it
comes to gluten free products.
Canadian comedian Darcy
Michael has celiac disease,
which means he's gotta be
gluten free.
(laughter)
>> Just the little things.
The typical you want what
you can't have.
>> Tom: And he's not amused by
the hype that leads to things
like this.
>> Tom: Seriously, gluten-free
shampoo.
The likelihood of anyone even
with celiac needing something
like this is next to none.
Do you use this?
Never mind.
Darcy does like the idea of
more gluten free options.
Even though they can cost more
'cause companies say they're
complicated to make.
As for the rest of us, what do
we get out of it?
Well, white bread isn't seen as
the healthiest of breads.
So we take a loaf of it and
this whole grain to test
shoppers' assumptions.
>> Tom: So we've got your
basic wonder bread and this is,
this a gluten-free brand.
>> If you've heard gluten-free
is good, you're going to buy
this one.
>> I guess I would say maybe
>> So between these two, I
this one.
would likely choose that.
>> So between these two, I
>> Gluten-free stuff is
would likely choose that.
generally more expensive,
>> Gluten-free stuff is
so...
generally more expensive,
(laughter)
so...
>> If it's more expensive it's
(laughter)
gotta be better for you.
>> If it's more expensive it's
>> Yeah, maybe.
gotta be better for you.
>> Tom: Better for you?
>> Yeah, maybe.
Hmmm.
>> Tom: Better for you?
(♪♪)
Hmmm.
>> Tom: Welcome back to
(♪♪)
"The Price is What?
>> Tom: Welcome back to
We're looking at gluten free,
"The Price is What?
but thinking it can be gluten
We're looking at gluten free,
pricey.
but thinking it can be gluten
So how gluten healthy is it?
pricey.
Cass and Chris take it away!
Remember that Udi's whole
grain bread?
Compare it to this white
bread.
Brand for brand, Udi's has
more calories.
More sodium.
Way more fat.
Double the sugar.
And less of the good stuff,
fibre!
Next to this whole wheat
version.
Similar results, and even less
fibre.
So if you're gonna go
gluten-free, you might want to
check the facts.
Like this major fact.
Cutting the stuff out means
potentially losing lots of
important nutrients from your
diet.
Yet new products hit the shelves
every day.
Promoted by the industry as a
way to better health.
Professor Timothy Caulfield
says it's really all about
marketing.
>> Just because it's gluten-free
for sure does not mean that
it's healthier.
>> Tom: So are you saying then
there are companies capitalizing
on this murkiness to put
products out there?
>> The truth is so so simple.
But the market doesn't want it
to be simple, right?
They want the message to
be--to be complicated.
They want to sell these
different kinds of, whether
it's a fitness routine, some
kind of magic diet, or some
kind of magic food product,
they want to be able to market
those things.
They don't want the simple
truth which is, you know, eat
lots of fruits and vegetables.
Get your exercise, that's
about it, right?
And you can't sell a lot of
products with that message.
(♪♪)
>> Tom: He's right.
But what about people without
celiac disease who say they're
gluten intolerant?
There's no agreed upon
diagnosis for that.
Do any of your friends say
they're gluten-intolerant?
>> Yeah.
One of my closest friends Reva
says she's gluten-intolerant
but from what i've seen that's
only 6 days a week because she
refuses to give up Friday night
pizza.
(laughter)
>> Tom: But this is serious
business to companies like
Udi's.
Last year, the American
foodmaker commissioned
something called "Canadian
attitudes towards gluten free
study".
It concluded we feel healthier,
happier and more energetic
reducing or cutting out gluten.
>> Tom: People who go gluten
free say they feel better,
they have more energy.
How do you explain that?
How do you counter that
argument?
>> So yeah, the placebo effect
is real and it's powerful, we
have to remember that, right?
But I will say it's very very
difficult to make direct
causal relationships between
going gluten-free and--and
feeling better and having more
energy and there's no evidence
to support that conclusion.
But that hasn't stopped Udi's
from suggesting going gluten
free could give you more energy!
And that there's no downside
to trying a gluten free
lifestyle
(♪♪)
>> Tom: I show Caulfield Udi's
website.
>> There is a downside, right?
'Cause you're going to be paying
more, right?
Almost certainly.
And it is challenging to eat the
nutritionally balanced diet that
they're recommending, right?
It becomes more difficult to
do that.
But wait, there's more.
Udi's also suggests going
gluten-free may improve
symptoms of autism.
In children.
Any clear science on that?
Not yet.
>> It really frustrating that
you have this kind of portrayal
given the state of the science.
Are they playing on parental
concerns?
Are they--are they playing on,
you know, almost parental
guilt, that they should be
taking this kind of action to
try to improve these conditions.
Parents may be willing to try
anything.
>> Tom: We ask Udi's for an
interview, many times.
They turn us down.
(♪♪)
>> Tom: So we head to the
nation's capital ...
(♪♪)
>> Tom: where we hear Udi's
has a booth at this gluten free
expo.
>> This is cinnamon raisin
actually.
The place is filled with all
sorts of gluten free goodies.
But we've got an appetite for
answers.
And make a bee line to the
Udi's booth and a company rep.
We're doing a story on the
gluten free trend, how people
are going gluten free a lot --
and we re just asking questions
why people are going --
especially if they don't have
celiac -- why would people go
gluten free?
>> They just feel better.
>> Tom: Yeah?
>> A lot of people -- an
intolerance -- if you feel
tired, people with ADHD, if
they go gluten free they find
that their symptoms are a lot
less.
>> Tom: Really?
Boy, first autism, now ADHD?
>> Tom: So when people come up
and ask you about the products,
do you tell them about the
ADHD and things like that?
>> Yeah, if it comes up.
>> Tom: Really, yeah?
And you feel confident that's
the case?
>> I mean it works for some
people so you have to at least
say if it works why not try it.
>> Tom: We came looking for
answers and leave with evidence
that's -- once again --
anecdotal.
>> There is no evidence that
going gluten-free itself
is -- is beneficial, right?
So yeah, I mean there's a
downside to it in expense, in
convenience, and trying to
maintain that nutritious
lifestyle.
As for our shoppers, they're
starting to see past the glamour
of gluten free.
>> Tom: Most people don't need
a gluten-free diet.
>> I agree.
>> Tom: You believe that?
>> I believe that.
>> Tom: Will you keep buying
gluten-free products, do you
think?
>> I've kind of edged away
from it.
I was actually going to look --
I make my own muffins and
whatnot.
>> No, we can come over to
your house.
You can make me some
gluten-free muffins.
No one's going to complain.
>> Well, you'll have to bring
the recipe.
(laughter)
>> I got google.
We're covered.
>> Tom: Take it from Darcy,
unless you have a real health
issue, don't buy the gluten free
hype.
Just remember the truth behind
the trend.
>> Erica: Coming up.
>> Tom: Cue drumroll.
>> Erica: Envelope please.
Who's the winner of Canada's
dumbest charge?
Up next.
>> Tom: Fight back, be a
Marketplace Watchdog.
And help us sniff out scams.
(♪♪)
>> Erica: Time to meet up with
the winner of Canada's dumbest
charge!
(♪♪)
>> Erica: After combing the
country for your nominations.
>> Do you think I have Canada's
dumbest charge?
(roosters crowing)
>> Erica: We narrowed it down
to the five top contenders!!
>> In front of a live audience
in Toronto, five Canadians
took the stage.
>> I think I've got it in the
bag.
(cheering and applause)
>> Tom: And duked it out to
convince you to vote for their
dumb charge.
>> Canada's dumbest charge is
the fee that we pay for paper
bills and bank statements.
>> Jason Card had it with
paying 2 bucks extra to get a
paper bill and bank statement.
>> Hey ho, hey ho, this paper
charge has got to go!
>> Bell charges $2.80 cents a
month for touch tone service.
(barking)
>> Selma Schachner is calling
out touch tone fees.
>> You people are bandits.
It's a money grab because in
this day and age you have no
choice but to use touch tone
service.
>> Tom: Lisa Witts believes
banks are hammering us with ATM
fees!
>> This is how I feel when I use
another bank's ATM.
(ding)
>> I feel like I'm getting
dinged!
>> Mike Anderson says airlines
charging to select your seat
should take off!
>> When I see something that
appears unfair, I like to stand
up and make it right
>> Tom: And Lauren Cooper
is singing the blues about
Ticketmaster fees!
>> This big time company
who has very little to no
competition whatsoever can gouge
you.
>> Erica: After our five
contenders made their case,
you voted -- in the tens of
thousands!
Vented to us on video.
>> This touch tone fee is the
dumbest charge.
>> I went with Ticketmaster.
>> Bell's touch tone fee needs
to go, good bye.
>> I vote for ATM fees.
>> Tom: Your dumb charges even
trend on Twitter.
(♪♪)
>> Tom: We counted up your
votes.
>> Erica: Five Canadians,
>> We're going to get rid of
this charge.
>> Erica: Five fees.
>> Tom: But only one can take
the dubious title of --
>> Canada's dumbest charge!
(cheering and applause)
>> Erica: And now, the moment
you've all been waiting for!
>> Tom: We've got a winner!
>> Erica: Or should we say,
loser?
>> Tom: Cue the drum roll!
(drum roll)
>> Erica: Envelope please!
>> Tom: Aha.
>> Erica: Hmmm.
>> Tom: Let's get moving!
>> Erica: Okay.
(♪♪)
>> Erica: I'm off to deliver
the news to the winner.
(bell ringing)
(dog barking)
>> Erica: Selma Schachner, you
have Canada's dumbest charge!
>> Wow!
That's fabulous!
Thank you.
I'm flattered.
I think there are a lot of
people out there, who are fed
up with Bell.
>> Erica: Well, thousands and
thousands of Canadians voted,
and a lot of them were in your
corner.
>> Really?
>> Erica: Selma's inspiration:
her mom.
>> She'd be awe struck.
She'd be very proud.
Yeah, because she taught me
about being principled.
It's time to listen to your
customers.
>> Erica: Well there's no
better way to give Bell that
message than in person.
We're headed there now.
Do ya wanna come with us?
>> Do I?
I wouldn't miss it for the
world!
>> Erica: Grab your coat!
Come on, buddy.
We're going on a trip!
(barking)
>> Erica: We hit the road and
show up at a nearby corporate
office.
>> Erica: Ready to call them?
>> As ready as I'll ever be.
>> Erica: They won't return
our calls, so we give it one
more try, leave Bell a message.
>> Erica: Canadians have voted
and Canada's dumbest charge
is Bell's touch tone fee.
Really hoping that somebody
could come out and speak with
us.
Let's see if they call us back.
>> Okay, great.
>> Erica: We wait but no word.
>> That's a little
disappointing.
I would have hoped that they
would have at least addressed
this issue.
>> Erica: But we've got a little
message for Bell.
We leave them a calling card
>> Home of Canada's dumbest
charge: Bell touch tone fee,
perfect gift for them.
>> Erica: Bell won't come on
camera but in a statement
tells us the touch tone fee
isn't going away.
>> Sooner or later someone's
going to listen to us.
>> Tom: We're hoping Ottawa
listens.
We ask the Minister of Industry
to talk.
No luck but we catch the ear
of the opposition consumer
critic.
>> Thank you Mr. Speaker.
CBC Marketplace has identified
the dumbest charges that
Canadians consumers pay.
ATM fees, pay to pay fees,
airline fees, touch tones
fees.
When will the government stop
the nickel and diming of
Canadians?
>> Hear, hear.
(applause)
(banging on tables)
>> Mr. Speaker, Canadian
consumers deserve access to
credit on fair and transparent
terms.
>> Tom: Nothing on touch tone
but new legislation could outlaw
telecom paper bill fees.
>> Erica: Meantime Selma's got
a message for Bell.
>> The word is out there, that
I have Canada's dumbest charge.
Or rather, that you have
Canada's dumbest charge.
>> Tom : So touch tone is
number one, and by far -- it
took 41 percent of the votes.
Wanna know how the other dumb
charges ranked?
Coming in at #2, with 26
percent of the vote, paper fees.
Number 3, ATM fees.
Flying in 4th, airline seat
selection.
And landing in 5th place,
Ticketmaster.
>> Canada, don't give up, fight
for what is right.
>> Tom: Take it from a winner
and keep sending us those
dumb charges.
>> Erica: Next week on
Marketplace.
>> Tom: Who wants to play our
game?
>> Erica: Remedy or rip off!
>> The price itself is a ripoff!
>> Tom: We reveal how not to
get fooled by a slick sales
pitch.
>> We're both hungry and the
tea is not holding up.
>> Erica: How big names --
>> I just told you, it works for
me.
>> Tom: And big marketing --
>> On a monthly basis, every
program is $394.99.
>> Erica: Get you to spend big
bucks!
>> It was like an infomercial,
buy, buy, buy.
(♪♪)